[THEME MUSIC]
>>SCOTT WOLTER: Leonardo da
Vinci and the Shroud of Turin.
Was there a deal
with the Church?
I'm Scott Wolter,
forensic geologist
and a Knights Templar.
>>TIMOTHY HOGAN: And I'm
Timothy Hogan, grand master
of the Knights Templar.
And this is "Mysteries
of the Knights Templar."
[THEME MUSIC]
Leonardo da Vinci created
a miracle for the Vatican
in exchange for the Vatican
leaving the underground Templar
tradition alone.
>>SCOTT: A deal with the church
involving the Shroud of Turin?
Well, this is very interesting
because the Shroud of Turin
is one of the most well
known religious artifacts
in the world.
And, of course, it
has an image of a male
that's burned into the cloth.
And many people believe that
it represents the cloth that
was covering Jesus, and
then when he ascended,
the image was then
burned into the cloth.
>>HOGAN: Well, at
least according
to the order's records,
what really happened
here is the order had acquired
a shroud from the gnostic sect
of the Druze in the Middle
East, that the Templars had
close associations with.
This shroud actually did
not have any image on it
at all at the time.
But it was just something that
had existed within the records
and within the archives.
Leonardo da Vinci was
friends with Pope Leo X.
And he struck a
deal with him and he
said, look, I will produce
a miracle for the Church
if you agree to leave
the underground Templar
bodies alone to just do
the stuff we need to do.
And Leo X was open to this idea.
So what he did was
he gave Leonardo room
within the basement
of the Vatican,
which there was a morgue.
>>SCOTT: Why would they need
to cut a deal with the Templar
order?
>>HOGAN: It was a
win-win situation.
By striking this deal,
it allowed the church
to have a miracle,
which could help
with the faithful of the Church
to give them a renewed faith,
if you will, and it would
help the underground Templar
movement to do its work, right?
Leonardo da Vinci was
already experimenting around
with camera obscuras.
What he found is that
with the camera obscura,
he could create
an inverted image.
Really, I mean, you could do
this with a pinhole camera now.
But at the time, Leonardo needed
something a little bit more
advanced.
So he hired German lens
makers to specifically make
special lenses that could be
fitted for this camera obscura.
His plan was to take
emulsion and put it
on this shroud that had
been obtained from the Druze
to the Templars,
take an emulsion
to put on the shroud
using chemicals
that was produced alchemically
in Leonardo's lab,
specifically to burn an
image from the camera obscura
onto the cloth itself.
>>SCOTT: So wait a minute.
It's not Jesus then?
>>HOGAN: It's not Jesus.
This was actually the first
photograph in modern history.
>>SCOTT: Yeah.
>>HOGAN: But the reason why
they had to do it in the morgue
specifically was
because they needed
a body that wasn't going to
move for a long period of time.
>>SCOTT: Because of
the exposure time.
>>HOGAN: To exposure time in
order to burn the image in.
What Leonardo did
was he actually
folded over the area,
which would be the head,
and he just burned
a body into there.
Now, when the German
lens maker saw this,
they started to get a sense for
what was going on down there.
They didn't understand it.
They just saw
these weird images.
They thought Leonardo
was doing necromancy.
And they accused him of that.
They said, look, you're
doing alchemy and necromancy.
And we don't want to
create lenses for you
if you're going to do this.
>>SCOTT: Oh.
I see.
>>HOGAN: But
eventually, Leonardo
was able to get
the image created
through the lenses he had.
Now, historians know about
this episode in history
in which he was working
with German lens makers
while he was working on a
secret project for the Vatican.
They just don't
know what it was.
>>SCOTT: They didn't know
what the project was.
>>HOGAN: It's exactly right.
But what it was to
create this shroud.
And for the final capstone,
if you will, of this shroud
Leonardo used his own face
for the face of Jesus.
>>SCOTT: So it's not
Jesus, it's not de Molay,
it's actually da Vinci.
>>HOGAN: It's Leonardo himself.
>>SCOTT: It's Leonardo himself.
>>HOGAN: Yeah.
And you can see this, even
if you look at the shroud
to this day, you can see that
the head is separated ever
so slightly.
>>SCOTT: I've actually
seen photographs of it
in one of the
churches in Europe.
And there is a line.
>>HOGAN: Yeah.
Well, I mean, not only was
that line from the cloth being
folded over, right?
Because they had to put
this head on separate
from the body like a
Frankenstein monster--
>>SCOTT: So there was
a demarcation, right?
>>HOGAN: But he
left the demarcation
because of his veneration
of St. John the Baptist.
>>SCOTT: Who was beheaded.
>>HOGAN: Beheaded.
Right.
And this is why even to this
day, if you look at the shroud,
if you look at the
face of the shroud,
you can see there's
a slight fish eye
effect that come from the lens.
>>SCOTT: Oh, right.
>>HOGAN: It also explains
some of the lighting that
would happen from the lenses.
And scientists--
modern scientists
have figured out that
the shroud was created
through some sort
of light emanation
but they don't know how or why.
Well, this is why.
It's because it was the first
photograph in modern history.
>>SCOTT: Well, you know what?
That makes perfect
sense because if this
was the shroud of
somebody who was dead
or even if they were dead
and then rose from the dead,
there would be some
type of organic material
that was left in the cloth.
And that can be dated, right?
>>HOGAN: That's right.
Well, and in fact, the
only organic material
that they have
found on the shroud
is from Druze DNA that's
dated from the 1300s.
So the 1200s or the 1300s, which
puts it right in the time frame
of when the Templars were
associating with the Druze
where they obtained the
cloth from the Druze.
So this is a form of
alchemy using light, right?
>>SCOTT: How specifically
did he do it?
Do we know?
>>HOGAN: Yeah.
He used silver salts.
Not unlike how early photography
is burnt into images later on,
but it was just happened
to be done on a cloth
instead of on a piece of paper.
>>SCOTT: Right.
>>HOGAN: And all the ingredients
that was needed to do this
are found in
Leonardo's notebooks.
I mean, he detailed it all,
including the camera obscura.
So it's all there.
It's just people haven't
pieced it together.
And it was very important to
the Templar order at the time
and to Leonardo that
the family to reveal
the shroud to the public would
be the de Charney family.
>>SCOTT: Who was--
>>HOGAN: Geoffroi de Charney,
the former Normandy preceptor
who was burnt at the stake
with Jacques de Molay.
And there's a bad stigma
associated that had this family
member burnt at the stake.
>>SCOTT: Well, especially when
you have the church telling
the whole world that your family
member was a heretic, that's
why we burned him at the stake.
>>HOGAN: Right.
>>SCOTT: Now, they're
not in a position
to tell people the truth.
And people wouldn't have
believed it, anyway,
because in many
ways, they either
were totally dedicated
to the Church
or who are you going to believe?
I got to believed the Church,
I'm not going to believe you.
Why would they burn you?
I mean, that was a tough one.
>>HOGAN: So this was a
way to help the de Charney
family save face.
>>SCOTT: Right.
>>HOGAN: Pope Leo X
certainly went along with it.
So the de Charney
family is the one
that was allowed to reveal
the shroud to the public,
and it's been deemed
a miracle ever since.
So by giving this shroud
to the de Charney family
after Leonardo was
finished working on it,
and then having the de
Charney family in turn
give it to the church, it helped
clear the de Charney family's
name of having been
associated with this heresy.
And it was of benefit
to the Church,
because now the
church had a miracle.
>>SCOTT: Well, in addition to
that, the win for the tradition
was Leonardo basically said,
back off the scientists.
>>HOGAN: Yeah.
>>SCOTT: People like Galileo
let them do their work,
and you can have your
miracle and everybody will
play nice from here on.
>>HOGAN: That's right.
And you have to remember
Leonardo had been schooled
with a number of other
Renaissance thinkers
and alchemists and painters.
People like Botticelli,
for example, and Raphael.
They had all been schooled
in the same school who
were committed to not
only understanding
the symbolism and
the mythologies
and the texts that were being
brought back by the Templars,
but then incorporating it into
artwork of the Renaissance.
>>SCOTT: Speaking of
artworks and Leonardo da
Vinci and secrets,
there's actually
a secret that is embedded in
another piece of his artwork
that is absolutely fascinating.
And what am I talking about?
>>HOGAN: Well, you're
talking about "The Virgin
of the Rocks."
>>SCOTT: That's right.
That's right.
And what a lot of
people don't understand
is da Vinci was actually
asked by the Church
to create a piece
of art that would
become virgin on the rocks.
And when you look
at that image, you
see Mary standing in blue in
front of two children, which
are supposed to be Jesus and
John the Baptist as children.
>>HOGAN: Correct.
>>SCOTT: The only
problem with this artwork
is there's another person in the
picture on the right-hand side
dressed in green
and orange, which
happened to be the symbolic
colors of Mary Magdalene.
Orange representing
the region in France
that legend says she disappeared
into after the crucifixion,
and green representing her
Celtic roots and ideology.
So you've got this woman
with Auburn hair sitting
on the right, and
the problem with this
is they were all
contemporaries in age.
So if that's Mary Magdalene,
those two children cannot be
Jesus and John the Baptist,
which begs the question,
if that's not who they
are, then who are they?
>>HOGAN: Yeah.
And at least according
to the Templar tradition,
these were the children of
John the Baptist and Jesus
that they both had
with Mary Magdalene.
>>SCOTT: Wait a minute.
Wait a minute.
Do you realize
what you just said?
>>HOGAN: Yeah.
I do.
I mean, according to
the tradition, John
the Baptist and Jesus were
both married to Mary Magdalene
and had children with her.
Initially, Mary Magdalene was
married to John the Baptist,
they had children.
John the Baptist was
meant to be the leader
of this new tradition.
He was certainly the
initiator of Jesus.
And when he was
killed early, Jesus
had to take on that new role.
And Mary Magdalene
didn't marry Jesus
and had children through Jesus.
So this painting seems to
be suggesting the children
from both people
and Mary Magdalene.
>>SCOTT: My understanding
is in the first century
to be a rabbi, the
tradition was not only
were they required
to be married,
but they were also required
to have a son for succession.
Apparently according
to the tradition,
that somebody in the family,
like a cousin in this case,
was obligated to marry her.
Because what I've also heard
is that the priestly line
of the tradition went
through the feminine.
What this looks like is
something that, first of all,
is heretical to the church.
But to people that are
pragmatic and looking at this,
it's still shocking.
But when you understand
the tradition of the time,
it makes perfect sense.
>>HOGAN: It does.
>>SCOTT: And da Vinci obviously
knew that because my guess is,
he's part of this bloodline too.
So this secret was
passed down and it
was his job to preserve
it, to be revealed someday.
>>HOGAN: Well, and this
is part of the reason
too why he was always so
obsessed with John the Baptist.
I mean, not just this painting,
but in other paintings as well.
He has paintings of John
the Baptist himself.
And there's allusions to
John in other paintings.
So yeah.
And let's not forget, it
was Hugues de Payens who
was ordained under apostolic
succession in Constantinople
in a Johannite lineage, where
he would have learned about this
before they went down there.
And the Templars also had
associations with other groups
like the Mandaeans, for example,
in places like Iran and Iraq
who venerated John the
Baptist over Jesus.
And this was, again,
a Gnostic tradition.
>>SCOTT: And if
we want to go back
to the first version of that
painting that da Vinci did,
you also see Mary
Magdalene going like this.
>>HOGAN: Yes.
>>SCOTT: OK.
She's pointing to
John the Baptist.
Well, if I make
this hand gesture
and rotate it 90 degrees,
what do you have?
The compass and square.
>>HOGAN: Correct.
>>SCOTT: Right?
>>SCOTT: So when da Vinci
finished this painting
and he presented
it to the church,
they basically
said, sorry, Gunnar.
Do it again.
They didn't want it.
So when you look at the second
version of the painting,
it's quite different.
Mary is still in blue, but all
of a sudden, the two children
have halos over their heads.
John the Baptist is carrying
a cross and Mary Magdalene,
now all the colors are gone,
the hand pointing is gone.
We can't have her in that image.
>>HOGAN: Well, and in
the first picture of it,
you have one hand
going like this
while the other
hand is going across
and it's holding an
invisible head and a cut
across the throat.
>>SCOTT: Yeah.
>>HOGAN: And then that
was removed by this,
time the second painting was.
>>SCOTT: Of course, it was.
>>HOGAN: Right.
>>SCOTT: OK.
Now, there's one
more piece of art
that we would be remiss
if we didn't bring it up,
the "Last Supper."
>>HOGAN: Yeah.
>>SCOTT: And there's a lot
of secrets hidden in there.
What are some of your favorites?
>>HOGAN: Well, I mean, with the
"Last Supper," first of all,
we have all of the perspective
of the painting going
to Jesus's right
eye, which is kind
of interesting from an
esoteric standpoint in terms
of representing that
eye of deity that
is emphasized in traditions.
>>SCOTT: Like the back
of the dollar bill.
>>HOGAN: Like the back
But even beyond that, there are
signs within the painting that
are reminiscent of secret
signs that you find
within the Templar tradition.
In the past, there
continue to be passed down
within Freemasonry to this
day, including distress signs.
>>SCOTT: How about the knife?
>>HOGAN: There's a knife
coming out of nowhere
being held at the abdomen
area of one of the disciples.
Then, of course,
obviously, there's
the figure next to
Jesus, which some
have said it's supposed
to be John, the beloved.
But also tends to look like
Mary Magdalene herself.
>>SCOTT: Well, I don't think
it looks like Jon at all.
I think it looks like a female.
And it's definitely Mary
Magdalene, in my opinion,
but on that note,
there is something else
that's hidden in the painting.
If you look carefully
on what would
be the left side of the
table as you're viewing it,
the right side from the people
sitting at the table, actually
the shoulder and neck
of one of the disciples
is actually a baby.
It's a boy--
>>HOGAN: Yeah.
>>SCOTT: --wearing blue.
You can actually pull Jesus
and Mary Magdalene together
and she'll have her head
leaning against his shoulder.
And then you can actually
take the baby and bring it in,
and it fits right in the
middle with her holding it
in her arms.
So this is another secret
that actually dovetails
with "Virgin on the Rocks."
But the point is,
Jesus was married.
He was married to Mary Magdalene
and they had at least one son,
they had a daughter too.
Her daughter was Sarah.
This is heretical
to a lot of people.
But what I'd like to
point out, in 1980,
there was a tomb discovered in
the East Talpiot neighborhood
in Southern Jerusalem
called the Talpiot tomb.
And basically, what happened is
one of these underground tombs
was found.
Antechamber, burial chamber.
And inside the burial chamber,
they found 10 ossuaries.
Seven inscribed with names,
six in Aramaic, one in Greek.
And when the archeologists
translated these inscriptions,
they had names like Jesus
or Yeshua, son of Joseph.
James, son of Joseph.
Brother of Jesus.
Joseph, Maria, Jose, and the
last one, written in Aramaic
was Judah.
Son of Jesus.
So that child in virgin
on the rocks that
was in Mary Magdalene's
lap was Judah.
The seventh and the last
ossuary that was pulled out that
was inscribed with the name.
This one in Greek said [GREEK].
[GREEK] is a title of honor
as in Lord, master, or queen.
And there have only been 6
out of about 3,000 to 4,000
ossuaries that have
been found in Israel
that have this title on it.
Three are male, this is the
third one that's female.
So here we have a
tomb in Jerusalem
that the world largely
doesn't know about
because it's been suppressed.
That appear to contain
the mortal remains
of Jesus, Mary Magdalene, their
son, and other family members.
So the whole notion
of these secrets
that Leonardo was preserving
and now being revealed really
shouldn't be that
much of a surprise.
>>HOGAN: Well, and we should
point out that particular tomb
was broken into during
the time of the crusades--
>>SCOTT: Yep.
>>HOGAN: --by the order.
The bones were
removed at that time.
It was just the boxes
that were left behind.
>>SCOTT: Well, not
only that, because I've
dealt with the people that were
working with those ossuaries,
the Talpiot team.
And basically,
what I was told is
that when the archeologists
found the ossuaries, I mean,
the tradition talks
about going in there.
Well, the facts support
that because they said,
largely, there were
very little bones left
and there was actually--
some of the material was
welded to the side of the box.
And they were able to
get extractable DNA.
They weren't complete
strands but partial strands.
And let's just say, that's some
very interesting things that
doesn't do anything to
pooh-pooh this story
that we're telling right now.
Now, talking about the
Templars going into the tomb
during the time of the
first crusades, what's
interesting about
the tomb is that when
the archeologists went in,
they found that somebody
had breached the tomb.
And this allowed
terra rossa soil from
rose gardens up above.
It kind of gives a new
meaning to the phrase--
>>HOGAN: Sub rosa.
>>SCOTT: Sub rosa.
Under the rose.
Right?
Well, the terra rossa
soil flowed into the tomb
and filled it up with up
to 2 feet of this material
because whoever went in,
didn't close the tomb properly.
So when they excavated the
ossuaries and the floor
of the burial
chamber, they actually
found three skulls placed in
a triangle in the East, South,
and West quadrants of the tomb.
Now, does that mean
anything to you?
Wait.
You're a past master
in Freemasonry, right?
>>HOGAN: Yeah.
I mean, this is a very typical
layout for guardianship.
What would be known as the
wardens or the guardians
of any type of sacred space.
It's certainly
something that follows
within the Templar tradition
of which later Freemasonry came
out of.
>>SCOTT: Well, we have
the Tyler who guards
the door to the lodge, right?
To keep out cowards
and eavesdroppers.
And my thought is, these
three skulls were probably
three Templar Knights who
died during the initial siege
of Jerusalem who would
have been honored
to have their skulls placed
at the symbolic guardians
in the tomb of their
ancestral king, right?
>>HOGAN: It should
be pointed out
that there are certain mystic
Islamic sects that are now
referred to as Sufi, but who the
Templars had associations with.
And they too set up their
temples with officers
in the East, the
South, and the West.
And one of their first
forms of recognition
is to do this to each
other, which, by the way,
this is what Leonardo da
Vinci later has John doing.
It represented the letter I
and a point becoming a line.
This was the countersign, which
was the line then becoming
a set of compasses, and it also
represented the Latin letter A.
And then the third
sign that was given
was this, which
represented the letter O.
And it represented
the compasses forming
a point within a circle.
Now, this IAO was the
Gnostic name of God.
But it was also believed
John the Baptist got his name
from because John, again,
in Greek is Ióannés, which
was IAO, how it started out.
So it was a title saying,
basically, of God.
But not just any God,
God of the first cause.
The creator of the
light that manifested.
The other thing that
Leonardo is known for
is his Vitruvian
Man, which basically
shows how man is composed of
both the square and the circle.
>>SCOTT: Yes.
>>HOGAN: The square representing
the physical world, the four
elements, the four directions,
the four sides of the square,
and the circle representing
spirit because it
had no beginning and no end.
>>SCOTT: Right.
>>HOGAN: So by uniting
the square and the circle,
it represented spiritualizing
the materializing
the spiritual.
>>SCOTT: Exactly.
>>HOGAN: Just like the
Templar cross represented.
And later, we find
that same symbolism
being utilized
within Freemasonry
with a square and the compasses
representing the circle.
>>SCOTT: Exactly.
Well, there's one other thing
about the Vitruvian Man.
You'll notice that he
has his feet spread,
but he also has
the feet together.
And when you look at that,
it's a very interesting symbol.
Now, this particular
hand gesture,
if we flip it back like
this, makes what letter?
>>HOGAN: Letter M.
>>SCOTT: This is the sign
of a certain tradition that
began right after
the put down in 1307.
So I would encourage people
that are watching right
now to look for the M sign.
You will see it in art,
you'll see it in sculpture.
Going back to just before the
put down and all the way up
through to this day.
But remember, it's not
necessarily the person that's
being depicted, Columbus.
That's one of my favorites.
And the first image
that usually comes up
is him standing here
doing the M sign,
and it's not subtle at all.
But of course, if
you don't know what
to look for you
don't see it, but now
you'll never not see
it going forward.
And remember, it's not
Columbus that was the initiate,
it was the artist that
drew the painting.
>>HOGAN: Yeah.
Well, I think we can
say that the Templar
order has been very good at
creating these secret signs.
They've left landmarks
for centuries.
And the work of Leonardo was
fundamental to some of this.
I mean, he really gave
birth to the Renaissance.
I mean, Templars had
acquired this knowledge
from the Middle East
and other places.
They brought it into Europe.
Europe was shut down
until Leonardo created
this miracle, which then
allowed all these documents
and everything else
to be celebrated
for the first time
in art and for
new scientific breakthroughs.
New texts were allowed
to be published.
And this is really what
created the Renaissance.
Leonardo was the
consummate diplomat.
He's the one who negotiated
this win-win situation that
helped both the Church
and the Templars,
even though they
had goals, which
may have been diametrically
opposed to each other.
>>SCOTT: Yeah.
>>HOGAN: So in the end, this
worked out best for everybody.
Thank you for joining us on
this episode of "Mysteries
of the Knights Templar."
[THEME MUSIC]